<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>List of Illustrations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<nav id="loi" epub:type="loi">
			<h2 epub:type="title">List of Illustrations</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="frontispiece-1.xhtml#illustration-1">Colonel Roosevelt and Colonel Rondon at Navaïté on the River of Doubt. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="frontispiece-2.xhtml#illustration-2">Map showing the entire South American journey of Colonel Roosevelt and members of the expedition.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#illustration-3">The mussurama swallowing the jararaca, or fer-de-lance, after having just killed it. From a photograph by Maza.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#illustration-4">Method of the mussurama’s attack upon the jararaca. Reproduced by courtesy of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Vital Brazil.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-5">A photograph of four fish hanging from lines against a black cloth.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-6">Man-eating fish, piranha. Note the razor-edged teeth.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-7">Indian boy with coati (coon-like animal) and parakeet.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-8">Tupi girl with young ostrich.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-9">Indian girl at cooking-pot.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-10">Indians rolling logs at wood station. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-11">Palms along the bank of the river. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-12">Cattle on the upper Paraguay River. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-13">Nips with the marsh deer.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-14">Returning to the fazenda (ranch) with the marsh deer on the saddle.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-15">The brown boy on the long-horned trotting steer, which he managed by a string through its nostril and lip. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-16">Colonel Roosevelt and the first jaguar. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-17">A South American puma.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-18">A South American jaguar.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-19">Nine-banded armadillo.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-20">Capybaras.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-21">Collared peccary.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-22">The entire party on the way back to the ranch. From a photograph by Harper.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-23">An Indian village. We passed an Indian fishing village on the edge of the river, with huts, scaffoldings for drying the fish, hammocks, and rude tables. From a photograph by Harper.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-24">Wood ibis. From a photograph by Elwin <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Sanborn.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-25">South American jabiru. From a photograph by Elwin <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Sanborn.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-26">Sariema. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-27">A jabiru’s nest. The young birds exercised themselves by walking solemnly round the edge of the nest. From a photograph by Harper.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-28">A troupial nest. The troupials, or big black and yellow orioles, had built a large colony of their nests on a dead tree. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-29">A photograph of a tree in the lower right, with three birds flying toward it from the left.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#illustration-30">Snakebirds and cormorants. Mixed flocks of scores of cormorants and darters covered certain trees, both at sunset and after sunrise.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-31">The great anteater.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-32">South American tapir.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-33">Colonel Roosevelt and Colonel Rondon with bush deer. We hung the buck in a tree. From a photograph by Fiala.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-34">The return from a day’s hunt. Tapir, white-lipped pecciary, and bush deer. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-35">Kermit Roosevelt. From a photograph by Fiala.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-36">Two <i xml:lang="pt">pranchas</i> being pulled by launch with our baggage and provisions. The <i xml:lang="pt">prancha</i> was towed at the end of a hawser and her crew poled. From a photograph by Harper.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-37">Colonel Roosevelt and Colonel Rondon looking over the vast landscape. The ground was sandy, covered with grass and with a sparse growth of stunted, twisted trees, never more than a few feet high. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-38">The Sato Bello Falls. There is a sheer drop of forty or fifty yards, and a breadth perhaps three times as great. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-39">One woman was making a hammock. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-40">A photograph of a woman carrying a child in a sling draped from her right shoulder across her front.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-41">A photograph of a woman carrying a child in a sling draped from her right shoulder, holding the child against her left side.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-42">The mothers carried the child slung against their side or hip, seated in a cloth belt, or sling, which went over the opposite shoulder of the mother (A few wore print dresses⁠—most of them wore nothing but a loincloth).</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-43">The kickoff: a player runs forward, throws himself flat on the ground, and butts the ball toward the opposite side. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-44">Often it will be sent to and fro a dozen times, from head to head until finally it rises. From a photograph by Fiala.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-45">The Falls of Utiarity. I doubt whether, excepting, of course, Niagara, there is a waterfall in North America which outranks this if both volume and beauty are considered. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-46">A lonely grave by the wayside. At more than one halting-place we had come across the forlorn grave of some soldier or laborer of the commission. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-47">The Parecís dance. Most of them wore on one leg anklets which rattled. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#illustration-48">The dance of the Parecís Indians. A number carried pipes through which they blew a kind of deep stifled whistle in time to the dancing. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-49">Tres Burity. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-50">The kitchen under the ox-hide at Campos Novos. From a photograph by Theodore Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-51">At the Juruena we met a party of Nhambiquaras, very friendly and sociable, and very glad to see Colonel Rondon. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-52">Nhambiquara child with a pet monkey.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-53">The men had holes pierced through the septum of the nose and through the upper lip, and wore a straw through each hole.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-54">Maloca or beehive hut of the Nhambiquaras. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-55">A Nhambiquara shelter hut and utensils. Their huts were merely slight shelters against the rain. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-56">The anthills were not infrequently taller than a horseman’s head. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-57">A Nhambiquara family. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-58">Nhambiquara women and children.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-59">“Adam and Eve.”</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-60">Nhambiquara archer. First position.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#illustration-61">Nhambiquara archer. Second position.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-62">I did my writing in head net and gauntlets. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-63">Colonel Roosevelt’s canoe disappears down the River of Doubt. From a photograph by Miller.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-64">Colonel Roosevelt’s and Colonel Rondon’s canoes at the mouth of the Bandeira. In mid-afternoon we came to the mouth of a big and swift affluent⁠ ⁠… It was undoubtedly the Bandeira. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-65">The Rapids of Navaïté. There were many curls, and one or two regular falls. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-66">Cherrie holding a rifle to show the width of the rapids at Navaïté. At one point it was less than two yards across. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-67">Portaging around Navaïté Rapids. We spent March 3 and 4 and the morning of the 5th in portaging around the rapids. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-68">Rapids of the Dúvida. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-69">Dragging the canoes over a portage by means of ropes and logs. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-70">Manner of dragging the canoes across a hilly portage. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-71">Making the big canoe which was soon afterward lost. The inside of the log has been hollowed out and the men are rolling it over to shape the bottom of the canoe. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-72">The Upper Dúvida.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-73">Cherrie in his canoe.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-74">Red-and-yellow macaw.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-75">Hyacinthine Macaw.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-76">Egret.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-77">Toco Toucan.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-78">Curassow.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-79">Trumpeter.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-82">The river rushed through a wild gorge, a chasm or canyon, between two mountains. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-83">Rapids at the chasm. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-84">We bathed and swam in the river although in it we caught piranhas. From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-85">Castanho-tree (Brazil-nut).</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-86">Pacova-tree. The huge pacova-leaves stamped the peculiar look of the tropics on the whole landscape.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-10.xhtml#illustration-87">At the rubber man’s house.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-10.xhtml#illustration-88">The canoe rigged with a cover under which Colonel Roosevelt travelled when sick.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-10.xhtml#illustration-89">The <i xml:lang="pt">camaradas</i>, gathered around the monument erected by Colonel Rondon. From a photograph by Cherrie.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-10.xhtml#illustration-90">Sketch map of the unknown river christened Rio Roosevelt, and subsequently Rio Téodoro, by direction of the Brazilian Government. This map was prepared by Colonel Roosevelt from his journal and the diaries of Cherrie and of Kermit Roosevelt, the war having prevented the arrival of the map prepared by Lieutenant Lyra. The Ananás may be the headwaters of the Cardozo or of the Aripuanan, or it may flow into the Canumá or Tapajos; it will not be put on the map until it is actually descended.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
	</body>
</html>
